And in, BHFU, we'd assumed a GP of about
0.4. I think our latest estimate is about 0.8, which is-
Okay ... if anything, slightly below the number of the market- Yeah ...
economists are- Thank you ... sorry, for the
March quarter.
We've also had some fiscal information out for
the month of April,
which is slightly ahead of our budget forecasts.
And obviously the most significant factor is
the
trend of oil prices in recent weeks, whereas at least
as of this morning, the futures curve is, if anything,
below what we're assuming in
the budget. So, as I said in the session with the
minister, we're broadly comfortable
still with
the trajectory of our forecasts. As I said, we still see
very significant risks. The Middle East is not a more
stable place than it was a few months ago.
We have to see how
the peace deal plays out. And
we have to see how long it takes for infrastructure in the Gulf to
return, supply chains to adjust,
and all of those things. So, we are certainly not
complacent about the risks around our
forecasts. The point I would make in terms
of the fiscals,
broadly,
the story is one that we've talked to the committee about before, that we have
a pretty large deficit at the moment.
If you look in international terms, it's
as I think Standard & Poor's said in their budget commentary,
the only AAA-rated country at the moment that has a bigger deficit than New Zealand
is the United States.
Obviously, the current government has a track towards that
deficit closing over the
forecast period, and the underlying dynamics of that are still in
place.
One of the things that I've been keen since I've come back into the role is
to give anyone who looks at our forecast more information
around the risks around any set of forecasts, because there are
always lots of risks. And
in
the last set of forecasts, we updated the quantification of
specific fiscal risks.
In this update,
we've introduced a new sort of statistical
and quantification of the risks around our forecast over the
projection period that I think is really helpful.
So we look at the errors in our forecasts over the last 20
years, and if you put them through a normal distribution, what does that imply
about the potential range of outcomes over the three or four years?
So, while we have a
surplus and a track over the forecast period,
the probability is we've got about a 50, 60% chance
of achieving that
on the basis of previous
errors.
Similarly, there are risks both upwards, upside and downside, quite
significantly around our debt track.
So I think the point I'm making is that when you look out three, four years,
particularly in the context of the shock-prone world that we're
increasingly seeing as our base case,
whoever is making fiscal decisions is going to have to think about those
decisions in the context of an outlook that could change quite
materially
in the coming years. And then finally,
as we've talked about in the session with the minister, I think we've enhanced our
disclosures around
potential costs of NDC, around offshore purchasing with the
note that we released recently. So I see that as part of
Treasury's job in terms of our being politically impartial, but
giving parties around the table information on
which they can inform the debate. So I'll
just leave it there, Mr. Chairman- Thank you.
I'm going to kick off with- And open to the committee's questions ...
Chloe Swarbrick. Thank you.
Thank you, and thank you as well for that note on the NDC potential
liability crystallizing. I know that we'll probably debate about the terminology,
but thank you for that work.
I just wanted to ask about the LNG facility services.
So what kind of assumptions did you make as
Treasury in your fiscals with regard to the LNG import facility and
those budget line that's associated
for it?
So our forecasts-
Yeah. So,
sorry. The forecasts basically include an expense
for the facility and a corresponding revenue.
So the assumption is that the expense will be recovered through
revenue.
Mm-hmm.
And basically, both of those match up.
So overall, it's, I suppose, fiscally neutral to the operating
balance.
Okay. Obviously, we now have subsequent to earlier this month, Minister
Brown stating that it will no longer be funded through a levy, which
now leaves it really unclear as to how cost recovery will work, and there
seems to be quite a substantive risk that these costs will then be borne by the
Crown.
How is this possibly being budgeted for?
Is this effectively what you were trying to allude to in your fiscal risk piece?
Yeah. No, I think what we've included in our
forecast has been accompanied with a specific fiscal risk.
So again, as the scheme is designed
and decisions around the scheme, there could be potential impacts which will differ
to what we've factored into our forecast.
So the government intends to sign the contracts for this LNG import facility,
but there's no provision for contingency or contingency for it in this
budget. How can the government proceed with signing contracts in that case?
Well, I suppose that's a choice for the government around if there is a fiscal
cost that does- Uh, pan out.
Mm-hmm
There's choices around how that is managed.
So,
there's choices around funding from the budget-
Mm-hmm
... um, sorry, the Budget '27 allowance.
Mm-hmm.
There's a budget, sorry, between budget contingency, so there's kind of
choices there, um, to provide funding if, you know, if,
if the situation occurs where there is a fiscal cost from the
facility. That's correct. I mean, got to come back to certainly the gov-
government's current intention though is that that is not going to be
funded from the budget.
Okay. Has there been therefore absolutely no indication, no request
for, uh, advice on the potential reallocation of the billion odd
dollars for the fossil fuel kind of response contingencies for that to be
reallocated into the LNG import facility?
No, we've not given any advice on that, no.
Has there been any other instance that you can think of, particularly, Ian, uh,
in your time in this role, where there has been a government move ahead with
contracting a huge piece of infrastructure to the tune of a billion
plus dollars without any idea of how it's going to pay for it?
Well, I think, I think ...
way, and has a series of milestones
there where it will, um, confirm, you know, the,
the pun- the funding options, you know, uh, around the time of
procurement.
So it's not the intention of the government to proceed with this
without scrapping down how it will be funded.
Okay. I hope that we see that materialize.
Um, so we've had two significant LNG price spikes in the last five
years. Has Treasury modeled the economic consequences for our
country if we inevitably get more future disruptions that spike
our electricity and gas prices under this-
Yeah
... LNG import facility scenario?
I don't, I don't believe that we have, uh, I mean, we can,
we can confirm that in writing, but I don't believe that we've done modeling
around, um, risk modeling around the, the
LNG and, uh, I'm not sure whether MB-
Mm
... has. That would be a good question to give-
But you could confirm that relying on imported energy makes, uh,
maintaining price stability harder?
Uh, no, I wouldn't, I wouldn't go that far.
Okay. Um, has the government, are you aware of, or have you been asked to provide
any modeling on the government providing any form of financial guarantees,
indemnities, or similar for the LNG, uh, terminal operator?
For example, I'm talking about harm to community and port workers' safety or
environmental damage that results, uh, from the government's decision to legislate
over the normal consenting processes.
We, we haven't been. Um, it's, it's important to remember
that MB is the lead agency around the
procurement, so some of those issues I, I would pick up with them.
But certainly Treasury hasn't provided advice as, as far as I'm aware.
You, you haven't been asked to run over the figures from MB on any of these issues?
Well, I mean, we, we, we are obviously, um,
working with MB in terms of the financial implications.
But in terms of the de- detailed issues that you're raising, Chloe, I don't, I
don't believe that we've been asked for p- particular advice.
Interesting.
Thanks. We've got a supplementary from Megan Woods.
Thank you. So Concept Consulting, um, has some analysis
out, um, that shows, um, if the LNG
terminal goes ahead, eventually gas consumption will be
supplied predominantly from overseas gas rather than New Zealand fields,
because it will extend the use case-
Mm-hmm
... around the infrastructure. And they're saying that will have an adverse effect
on New Zealand's balance of payments, increasing it by around
4% of '25, 2025's deficit
relative to the option where consumers transition to renewable electricity and
biomass. Which makes sense. You're, you're paying other
countries, uh, for molecules rather than producing electrons
here in New Zealand and creating jobs.
Has MB,
um, asked for any input for, from you
around the balance of payments impacts of progressing with
the LNG terminal?
I, I have, I have not, um... I don't
believe that's the case. Um, I'm happy to confirm that in writing, but I-
I could definitely-
Yeah.
Definitely.
I'm happy to. I don't think it's the case.
That would be great.
All right. We've got a new primary from Barbara Edmonds.
Thank you. Just, um, looking at the statement of actual contingent liabilities and
assets on page 21. Um, there's a note around
inter-segment eliminations, and it refers to uncalled
capital, the Ferry Holdings Limited, is that right?
Just checking.
Yep.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah. Can you just, um, just
take me through
what that un-, uh, what the, what the
uncalled capital is for in relation to Ferry Holdings?
Is it the actual ships themselves, or is it the
corresponding infrastructure? Can you provide, and provide a breakdown of that,
please?
If not, I could-
Well, in terms, in terms of breakdown, we can do that in-
In writing
... in writing.
Do you-
I think, um, like the uncalled capital is basically, uh, the
amount of shares that could be called from, um, from,
uh, Ferry Holdings. So-
Do you want to come forward? Sorry, just in case someone needs to pick it up.
Yeah. So, sorry, the, the, the amount dis-
disclosed, uh, in that statement basically reflects to the uncalled
shares, uh, that Kiwi, or sorry, that Ferry Holdings,
uh, uh, are able to call and the Crown provide capital to that.
It doesn't reflect, um, the, the amount which is
relating to-
The cost of capital
... uh, the, the ships versus in- the infrastructure around it.
So it's not directly related to that.
Okay. It's just uncalled shares.
So, uh, yeah. So it's basically the amount the Crown has, I suppose, committed to
provide to Ferry Holdings.
'Cause it's quite a big
figure.
Mm-hmm.
Yes. Mm-hmm.
It's a significant change.
Yep.
Yeah.
Yes.
Why so big?
Well, so, so basic-
I mean, such a, such a significant shift from 39, negative 39 to, uh, 1.1 billion.
Yeah. Uh, and, and that's basically related to the timing of when, um,
when, um, the, the announcements around, uh, the procurement
happened.
Mm-hmm
So watch us. We can come back to you with the timing, but I think it was around
November where the announcements were made-
Yeah
... last year.
Thank you.
Supplementary, Chloe?
No. That's it for that one.
Okay.
But for primaries, please.
Thank you. Dr David Olsen.
Yeah. Look, thank you again for outlining the way that
you're looking at risks, projected risks, and looking them through a range to
upside and downside. That's really good to hear.
My first question is,
do you foresee, given that new way of looking at forecasts,
continued volatility? Because you looked back 20 years, correct?
And it's not like we haven't had volatility in the last 20 years.
Is it more of the same, or has it increased?
Oh, I think our view is
that the likelihood is we will see increased volatility,
and that comes from a number of sources.
What's happened in the Gulf is just one example
of the geopolitical volatility that
we all live with. And unfortunately-
Yeah
... we don't see that changing anytime soon.
So-
There are then
other kinds of
shocks that can induce volatility.
Some of those are enduring. New Zealand, unlike many countries,
has a risk of a significant biosecurity shock.
We have more risk around seismicity than certainly most developed
countries. We have risks around the
increased
incidents of various climatic-related
risks. Now, some of those might be more locally based, but some of them could be-
Mm-hmm
... more national.
We've talked a little bit, I think, and when the minister was here about we
certainly see,
given the
state of equity markets internationally, the risks
of
financial shocks and we do see
countries are more interconnected.
International bond markets are interconnected.
So the likelihood of what happens overseas transmitting
itself to the New Zealand economy in some way, I think
it's as high as it's ever been, if not
higher.
So supplementary, it's that you would see that a solid position in net
core crown debt improving that will give us that headroom
to-
Look, it's one of the-
... manage those risks.
Look, I think it's one of the
lenses that you're increasingly seeing through Treasury
advice to the government is the concept of resilience.
So we can't wish away
these sources of volatility. What we can do is think about how does
the New Zealand economy best position.
Now, some of this is what I call macro resilience, so that's those settings around
monetary and fiscal policy. Some of it will be more what you might call
micro resilience, a bit about how do particular markets and economy,
are they set up so that they are more resilient to various kinds of
shocks. And I think the fuel crisis that we've just been
through is an image of that.
So,
we're forecasting trade surplus or current account surplus in
2028, if I remember rightly. And then anything-
Not a current account surplus. We have-
Okay. Just trade
... we have deficits right
through.
That's right. Yeah, you're correct.
But that is actually a key part for us, isn't it?
Understanding that kind of trade surplus resilience in that picture.
That's right. And that's where the fiscal story is also important.
So one of the reasons why we have a current account
deficit is it reflects the underlying savings and investment
balances in the economy, and the fact that government went from being a
consistent saver into the economy
versus being a consistent dissaver in the economy is one of the
reasons why that current account remains in deficit.
And that is certainly an issue that rating agencies, for example,
look at when they're making their judgment about our rating.
Thank you.
Dr Deborah Russell.
Oh, thank you. I want to ask some stuff around the reporting around climate.
So,
this is always the best session of the year, actually, when we get to have this
sort of discussion about the budget with our-
Hell yeah.
I really enjoy it.
Recognize it's not a bad session.
Tells you a lot about the state of our democracy.
Yeah, it does. So I'm just looking at the Beppu in and on page
80, you've got a discussion of the accounting treatment
of
New Zealand's NDCs. That's kind of interesting,
because last year, so this discussion, a very similar note
was in the financials-
Correct
... for the year to June '25.
Mm-hmm.
And,
last year the discussion of the budget was why we're not
recognizing this liability yet. So quite a discussion about
the levels of which you might recognize risk.
But sitting in last year's Beppu is just a minor
note about,
or it's not minor, it's a note about a risk, but there's nothing like this
discussion sitting in last year's Beppu, and it's not sitting in...
I had to really track it down to see where it was reported.
So this is kind of a little bit novel, pulling this statement of this
accounting policy through into this year's Beppu.
And to me, I guess I'm looking for the thinking behind it as to
why you're pulling it into this kind of prominence,
in terms of the actual risk. You've got virtually the same statement in the
statement of non-specified risk or something like that sitting up the front.
So what's the thinking there about pulling this particular-
Well, I think
there's
a couple of things-
Yeah
... Deborah. If I go back to where I started as more
generally we're seeking to lift the overall
quality of the risk analysis-
Mm-hmm
... in our documents.
Mm.
So that's actually probably the biggest part of the story.
So if you think from that- What are the risks that you would put some
attention to? And this is clearly one of them.
There clearly are
a group of pretty serious individuals and groups out there
who have some quite strong views-
McInnes Institute
... around, and so I respect those.
We
respectfully disagree with perhaps the solution, but I think fundamentally,
we
want to be clear about why we think the way we do.
And I link that to, it's not in the BFU, but it's in the technical
notes that we put around, but NDC is actually the key point here is
around, I think it's not so much the liability issue
or not, it's how do we provide all people who are
interested in this issue with information that can inform the public debate,
and we've done that through the mechanism of the technical
note that we released last week.
Yeah.
So I think that's the thinking as opposed to anything that has substantively
changed in the way we're thinking about this.
Thinking the technical note, that was the supplementary information.
Was it on the budget-
No, no, this is the note that went out on the Treasury website-
Oh, right. Last week
... last week. Yeah.
$5 billion potentially.
Oh, that one. Yeah.
That one. That note.
I know about that.
I guess
the other thing that I'm finding
interesting in this space, and you were here for the discussion we had with the
Minister of Finance about whether we meet our NDCs
by offshore purchases or whether we do it by
onshore action.
And our analysis has been that a lot of the onshore action
isn't happening. So it's a little bit hard to quantify what's going on here.
So,
they're neither promising to buy offshore, nor are they actually
undertaking action to reduce our climate emissions.
So that kind of liability is building up as well.
And I'm wondering how you might start reflecting that or how you might start
thinking about that or start reflecting that in
your budget documents and accounting documents.
Well, clearly, I think,
given where we're at at the moment and we're talking a bit about a period that-
Yeah
... finishes in 2030, so there's still
some way away. We have another parliament to essentially go
through.
There will be a series of both. What we stress in the technical
note we put out last week is look, there's still high levels of
uncertainty, both in terms of
what will be achieved in terms of
domestic mitigation,
the issues about costs of any offshore purchasing, the
institutional arrangements around that.
So there's a lot that we don't know at the moment,
and I think over the next few years, you'll begin to see
more clarity-
Mm
... around that based on both whoever in government and
the decisions that they make and what happens in the international
community. So I'm pretty sure as we move through the next parliament,
you will see an evolution of how those issues are
reflected through the suite of documentation that we
provide in budget.
So just another couple of questions following along in this climate space.
One is, I guess,
at the beginning of this parliament, we heard a lot of...
Well, I'll avoid the use of rhetoric.
I'll use the word discussion about fiscal cliffs.
So this was time-limited funding, which funding was there on a time-limited
basis, and it was claimed that the current government had been
left with a real fiscal liability.
So
obviously we don't agree with that analysis because we felt as though we had
signaled those things. But equally, by not grappling with
this $5 billion or so now-
Mm-hmm
... is the current government leaving quite
an issue to the next government coming in?
Which may be them or it may be us, and we're quite worried. Yeah.
Yeah.
Part of it is if you think about at least what
our note prompted last week is we are having that conversation, right?
Mm.
And
different parties have clearly different views, and we'll see how that
plays out. But I think our role at the moment is obviously we faithfully,
as we would with any government-
Yeah
...
reflect their intentions. We have a wider stewardship role
around looking at the sorts of risks that any New Zealand government might
face, and we have done that in this case,
because we think it is an issue that whoever is in government after the election
will have to grapple with in some form.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay, last, well, shifting to adaptation
policy, so it's climate related.
This is in last year's BFU
on page 77. We had a note about adaptation policy
changes, because the government had signaled its intent to
develop
a climate adaptation framework, which could create
funding decisions, so on.
I hunted, but I couldn't find a similar note in this year's BFU,
but that might just be because I didn't search hard enough or Google well enough.
Does anyone know where it is? Stuart, have you got...
Sorry, it's in last-
Let's come back to you on that one.
Yeah.
I-
Well, I don't know the answer, but that will be connected to the way we've
tried to streamline the fiscal risks.
Right.
And so-
Yeah. So the unchanged risks weren't in this year's BFU, and I couldn't
actually-
They're in the supplementary information
And I couldn't find this particular one in the supplementary information, but I
might have missed it. I did try, but I might have missed it.
Okay. Well, we can-
Yeah
... anyway, we can pick that up in a-
Great. Thank you
... further question, Deborah.
Yeah.
We've got a supplementary from Chloe and then Todd on the same-
Yeah. It was just to explore, if I may, this year, potentially a few
subs, but it is very much inquisitorial on this point of the NDC.
We've had much back and forth on this over the years.
Again, thank you very much for the present last week.
So I just wanted to confirm the basic calculus,
which is that if we are to take it, and I understand that this is where there
is some technical nuance with regard to Treasury's unwillingness to
recognize this as a constructive liability on the books.
But if we are to say, look, government is absolutely committed to making this
happen to the effect that it then can materialize effectively as a constructive
liability or however you would want to represent it.
The basic calculus, therefore, would become that
every reduction in domestic climate action, so
increase in our domestic climate-changing emissions, would therefore result
in an increase in us needing to buy offshore mitigation.
That logic still holds because it obviously was also underlying your analysis in
2022 with MFE.
Yes.
So just,
I missed the front part of your question.
Our nationally determined contribution-
Yeah
... in the Paris Agreement requires us to meet a national
determined contribution. That's our budget, effectively, and we can do that either
domestically or internationally.
Yes.
So if it goes down domestically, therefore our obligation goes up internationally,
if we are to take for granted that the commitment holds.
Yeah. I think it's not quite as straightforward as that, and some
of that gets to some of the issues that the minister was talking about,
about
at the end of NDC1,
what
the agreed arrangements will be across countries within the
context of Paris.
And that's still a little unclear.
It feels as though what's being implied there is the
potential that other countries, a la what we're already seeing explicitly with the
likes of the United States and other far-right political party leaders across
particularly Europe, indicating that they want to see their respective countries
pull out of the Paris Agreement. If I'm to read between the lines, are you
effectively talking about that? Or can you-
No, no, no. And I think, and certainly,
our understanding is what the minister said, this government has
no intentions of moving out of Paris.
I think the issue is one about how countries,
given that there will be
the likelihood of a number of advanced economies who will not meet-
Mm-hmm
... their NDC1.
How do they coordinate themselves?
How that will play out internationally.
Mm-hmm.
And there are a range of scenarios there, and I think there is still
a lot of uncertainty. And so coming back to the question that you raised, I think
that's why at the moment
it's a little too mechanical to say, well, you
do
more or less on domestic mitigation, and that will flow
through ergo into automatically more or less in terms of
offshore purchasing.
Because of the fact, on your analysis, the
context is capable of changing-
Absolutely
... by the issue of other countries not potentially meeting their obligations-
Or the-
... and therefore this international agreement falling apart.
Yeah. Now, I wouldn't say... Well, obviously the falling apart,
there's a scenario there that's not the one I'm focusing on.
It's more within the context of Paris among those countries that continue to
be part of Paris, how they will
agree to manage
it.
Hmm. And obviously the rationale that you've given in the past as to why
you don't consider this to be crystallizing as a constructive liability
is that the current government doesn't have a plan to
effectively meet that. Is not budgeting for it.
So the minister consistently, and the Prime Minister consistently saying this is a
commitment, doesn't constitute enough of a commitment for
Treasury to need to see it represented as a constructive liability.
Yeah.
So what, I know we've again gone back and forth on this, but you've gone away and
you've done a huge amount of work in the intervening year.
What criteria would enable this to then be construed as a constructive
liability? So I guess the point that I'm getting at is I just want us
to have sensible economic planning because I don't understand-
Yeah
... how we can be saying across parties that we have a commitment that we're not
budgeting nor planning for, that we risk crystallizing in 2030-
Right
... potentially to the tune of billions of dollars.
So I think, you want to talk a bit about the various kind of tests
that we would be looking at to
treat this as a liability? You want to talk about that, Jacqui?
So yes, under accounting standards, there are tests that need to be met,
to recognize an expense or a forecast expense in the
accounts. At the moment, we review that every time we produce a product
and see if those thresholds have been met or not.
At the moment, we're saying they still have not been met.
With any policy announcement or any statements that the government says, we
will relook at that each time we produce one of our documents.
So for sake of argument, what would need to change from a Minister of
Finance, a Prime Minister, every minister of this government saying that they're
committed to meeting the NDCs, albeit some grudgingly, I'm sure.
But saying that we're going to meet it,
what has to change? Because in the past you've told me that it's to do with them
actually budgeting for it, but therein kind of lies the irony of the thing, right?
That they have to budget for it in order for us to then be able to say that that is
a liability-
Mm-hmm
... whereas right now they're not budgeting for it, so it's not a constructive
liability.
So I think there's a--
I can't give you a, it's exactly this thing or this thing.
There will be a number of circumstances and statements made by any government-
Mm-hmm
... which we will look at in terms of does that tip you further along the,
we're actually obligating ourselves to do a specific thing which would make us
review what is a liability.
Yeah, so if we talk a hypothetical where Minister Swarbrick
said-
Thank you so much.
New Zealand is committing to, these are our plans for-
Mm-hmm
... offshore mitigation. If we don't do
the domestic side, and we're going to do it through these kinds of mechanisms-
Mm-hmm
... it's really concrete. It's very unequivocal.
It's getting below that sort of very general- ...
statement, those would be the sorts that we would be looking at.
Yeah. But I guess-
And I think the other point I want to come back to is,
at the end of the day, the party who is actually most important here in terms of
liability is not us, it's the Auditor General, right?
Mm. Mm.
Now, obviously, we work closely with them.
But it's not only going to be if the treatment changes in our
accounts, it's not just going to be because we change.
Mm.
It will need to be because of the general changes.
I mean, we could f**k it ad nauseam about technical accounting standards and
externalities, but-
A- a- absolutely.
Yeah.
Which is part of why, I suppose,
why I've tried to reframe this a little bit about the inf- because
actually the information that is in-
Yeah
... the public domain around these issues, because I don't think
necessarily having it as a liability, I suppose I'm
less convinced it's going to change
behavior.
Yeah.
What I think is more is the general information around there.
I guess, just as my final point on this, if I may, just to be really, really
clear, there is a potential, per the work that you have
obviously done, regardless of whatever the government of the day does.
There is, and I hear you in terms of the ambiguity of all of the different
variables and what other jurisdictions do.
Mm-hmm.
But there is a potential that this liability or whatever we
want to call it, crystallizes in 2030 to the
tune of us having to pay potentially billions of dollars for offshore mitigation.
There is a potential that that occurs.
There is a
potential.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. And you'll have the opportunity with Minister Watts at 1:30, I'm sure,
to take this.
He doesn't really answer those questions.
All right. Is that right?
Well, not in-
Revenue
... not in revenue.
I will be asking about the UTS, though.
Did you mean constructive liability or contingent-
Constructive liability
... constructive liability.
Contruction liability.
That's definitely different.
It's a new term for me. Thank you.
I've got hearing-
I've got a-
Oh, well, just to kind of close this up because-
Yeah
... and just so we're clear. Yeah, there is no constructive liability around-
No
... the NDC today.
That's right.
Auditor General agrees with your-
Absolutely
... analysis, that's great.
We've-
And then I just want to, and again, I don't want to, obviously Deborah, Dr.
Deborah Russell raised some other issues around, and we'll
just use the term fiscal cliff, and I understand.
But that was quite different because those were actual programs that
were in the budget and budgeted for, and so quite a different
situation to what we're discussing here.
Yeah, I think if I look, I think if I could keep going back to,
without getting to the political debate-
Yeah
... there's a whole range of uncertainties that
governments are going to be dealing with.
Now, some of them are in the time-limited funding-
Yes
... category. I think one of the things that I have been
reasonably consistent with this committee is saying,
that the next term of government,
there will be some really big decisions taken by whoever is in government that will
shape the trajectory around-
Absolutely
... fiscal path in the 2030s. So the issue we've been talking about with
Powee is one.
The renewal of the maritime fleet in the context of DCP is going to
be one of the biggest-
Mm-hmm
... decisions any New Zealand government takes in the
next decade in terms of a fiscal
sense. It's really big. There are big issues that we've highlighted in
fiscal risks about the funding of the National Land
Transport Fund, where we've gone from essentially a fully funded fund,
pre-COVID, to a fund that's now only half funded
by Fed and RUC. Those
are the really big,
and then obviously you've got the bigger demographic issues like
health, super, et cetera.
The fiscal challenges that any New Zealand government's going to face over the
next three to five years and the decisions that they take
will very much determine what that trajectory looks like as we go
into the 2030s. No pressure.
Thank you.
No pressure.
I'll go to now a new primary with Dan Goodwill.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Ian, to you and your team.
Just turning to my favorite table in the BeFu- ...
which is the economic forecast table 1.2.
Ooh.
Not necessarily the
time series that the minister likes, but
I know there's a lot of assumptions in here, so a range
of commentators who have different views on some of those assumptions.
But I'm just trying to reconcile
inflation forecasts for table 1.2-
Yep
... to the inflation forecast in table 4.2,
page 81. The CPI,
they're different, and I'm just keen to understand why they're
different, because I guess I'm really keen to see
what is the CPI that you're using to forecast
expenses and revenue increases
for this coming year and the next few years.
I did notice they were different, so I was just keen to see why they're different
or if I missed something. And then, more
importantly, what's the correct
CPI
that we're using to forecast expenses and revenue?
So they're both based on the same CPI forecast.
They expressed the rates of growth of inflation in different
ways. So in the table 1.2, it is the way
which we typically see the CPI released by Stats New Zealand.
That's saying how much higher is a price level in a particular quarter than the
same quarter a year ago.
Yeah.
On the latter table, it is an average of prices over that year
versus the previous year. So it's just a different way of calculating the growth
rate.
So yeah,
but the
same price levels and price numbers underpin both calculations.
So just-
But one's an annual percentage as an average.
So they're
different ways which you can measure it.
Okay.
One's a sort of point.
Yeah.
One point compared to a year ago, and the other is averaging the year versus the
previous year.
One's June to June.
Yep.
One's June quarter to June quarter.
Quarter to previous quarter. Yeah.
The other, that's the first table?
Yeah.
That's table 1.2.
That's 1.2.
Yes.
Yeah.
The second table is the average over that June year versus the
previous June year.
And so when we're forecasting expenses and revenue, are we
using the average-
Yes
... year or the
Yeah. So that's more relevant when we move to the June year
formulation-
Okay
... of expenses and revenue.
Okay. No, that's helpful. Thank you.
Are you
Peter, are you?
Yes. Peter Nelson.
Peter, yeah. Thank you, Peter.
The other thing is just, Minister mentioned around oil
prices that we're looking at that at the moment.
So just clarifying for you, central forecast for
this coming year,
what's track of oil prices? I guess m-many of us want to
know if oil prices are where they are now, is that good for the
government books?
Are we on track for the central forecast?
Because, I guess, we're not seeing any real
movement in the Strait of Hormuz, it's all just-
Yeah
... I guess speculative price declines.
Mm.
If there are still no real movement in the strait, but the
prices are still low,
what's that going to mean for-
Well, I think, and Peter can comment in a second about where we're at in terms
of current prices versus to what we've got in BFU.
But I think
what you'll see
increasingly in markets is markets will tend to, like they always
do, look ahead. So they'll be looking ahead about on the
assumption that the strait does indeed open-
Yes
... and production gets underway.
That will actually be factored into price.
At the same point, we know that there is going to be a time
where traffic through the strait will continue to be reduced compared
to pre-war levels.
We know we're in an environment where stocks globally are being run down
significantly, and at some point there are limits to how much
that can occur. That's why I think you'll continue to see
we're not complacent that prices will-
Mm
... will actually kind of follow down neatly.
I think you'll see at times those competing pressures
reflecting through in both ups and downs-
Mm
... in oil prices, even if the trajectory broadly
follows what you're seeing in the oil futures market.
Right.
Peter, do you want to, in terms of current forecast?
Yeah. Obviously, oil markets have moved a lot over the last few days.
At the time of the BFU, we did note that oil prices were above our
assumptions that we'd made-
Mm
... when we finalized the forecast.
But things have changed quite dramatically, and so oil prices are now currently,
and the futures are currently trading below what we've assumed in the Budget update
by several dollars at various points.
There is the risk. We need to see that be realized in terms of actual prices
paid in the future and flow through to pump prices.
But yeah, at the moment, that risk has shifted quite considerably, I guess, over
the last few days and with the positive developments.
And just to clarify, so what's the average rate of oil price that we've
assumed in the central forecast?
Well, they varied. Obviously, we had them peaking and then
falling over time. So they peaked at
$138 during the month of April
and fell progressively over. We had them falling back to
about $74
over time, by the end of the year, being sort of around that $80, $82
mark.
Right now, people are predicting sort of prices closer to sort of 70,
77, 76, 75 at the end of the year. So a few dollars below what
we'd assumed.
Okay. Thank you, Peter.
Dr Megan Woods.
No, I'm actually going to ask him one a little bit.
Okay, right. Thanks.
Thank you. Just want to ask a number of questions around pay equity.
Mm-hmm.
Since the proactive release that was done in July last year
'25, have there been any revisions to the advice that's been
redacted?
If not, can you provide any updates, whether it's written or
otherwise?
So we keep the discussion
constantly under review about what's in the public interest and what isn't to
disclose. But where we've landed even just as of yesterday is
that it's still appropriate to withhold the
contingency that has been put aside for Crown
funded pay equity, on the grounds of preserving the government's
negotiating position, and that's consistent with what we've done for the
last number of years across governments in terms of pay
negotiations, is making sure that those figures are
accounted for in the books, but not in a way that the counterparty to negotiations,
i.e. the people bringing the claim, can understand where the government's
at in terms of how much money it has available.
Have you had any new claims, the new-
Not that we're-
No
early pre-initiative discussions with any of the pay
equity sectors?
Not that I'm aware of, but to the extent that they're Crown funded,
that's a question more for the Public Service Commission than us, but not
that's come to our radar.
So you're still withholding the information because it's the way it's previously
treated, but you've had no new claims?
Yes, that's correct.
So
going through then again through the contingency.
The decision last year, I understood, was to get rid of
the-
The funded sector
... funded sector-
Yes
... pay equity.
Yes.
Subsume it into the public sector pay equity as a-
No.
No, no, no.
No. So as I understand it was,
there are two parts. So for the Crown as employer-
Yep
... there continues to be a contingency-
... that is reflected in the forecasts.
So within the BFU forecast, for Crown as employer,
that's in our forecasts.
But the specific number is withheld.
Is this part of the allowance?
Sorry?
It's part of the budget allowance?
No. It's in the forecasts. It's
built into the forecast, but it's not part of the 2.4
or whatever.
With respect to essentially
non-government employers
who were significantly
funded by the Crown,
so ECE, care and support, et cetera.
A decision was taken by the government last year
to essentially
consider any Crown funding with respect to those
settlements to be addressed on a case-by-case
basis as part of budget
allowances.
So to give you an example.
Yeah, no.
Is that clear? So that's the
distinction. So Crown as employer, still in the forecast, and
it need to be clear, it's Crown as employer using the current
sort of
frame as opposed to the pre-2025 frame.
But that's in the forecast. It's not in budget allowances, but essentially there's
no
claims as part of the budget
allowance. Okay?
So let's step through that. The
budget allowance this year was 2.1, and I think in the next forecast period
it's 2.1 or 2.4.
Yeah, 2.4.
Just people were both confused over that one.
It's a case-by-case basis. There is no TAG contingency,
and it's basically because they haven't applied, there is actually
nothing to support
any future government, whether it's this government or when we
come in in November.
No support, no contingency
whatsoever for that
funded sector pay claims.
Yeah, but the funded sector, you said-
That's correct.
None at all.
No, that's correct.
Wow. So we'll add that to another fiscal risk.
All right, so we've got a new primary from Chloe.
Cool.
Chloe, go on.
So I'm just asking about
page 64 of the FU. You're referring to the kind of
transformation plan which we were talking about in the previous hearing,
the 8,700 odd public sector jobs that the Minister of
Finance has announced will be cut across the public
sector. And you say, and I quote, "Delivering these baseline reductions will
require organizational change across the public sector, changes to programs and
transformation and how the public sector delivers services.
They may take longer than anticipated to implement and/or may not
eventuate in full." However, for the most part, you have
reflected some quite substantial
reductions in cost to the tunes of hundreds of millions of dollars, particularly
eventuating in the latter part of the forecast period.
Could you run us through the assumptions that you have made about how these
cuts will materialize?
Well, I think
what we're taking is...
Well, I think first point is in terms of the cabinet decision
around the baseline reductions, that is reflected
through in our forecasts.
Because this is a
set of reductions that go over essentially three years, it's
not surprising that at an agency basis,
how that is going to be delivered in each year is
still not established, because it was only determined as part
of this budget.
So what the risks is trying to highlight is
because not every detail has been worked through how each agency
is going to do that, there is a risk at some point that either the
profile doesn't quite match
the funding reduction or there are some issues that government will
have to reconsider. From talking to my colleagues across the public service,
I'd say there's a range of
situations. I think there are some agencies that are quite well-placed, who have
a good sense about how they are going to achieve these
reductions,
through to agencies where essentially ministers,
they're much less clear in an organizational sense and ministers
are essentially going to be asked to be making some policy choices
as well.
Yeah. As you kind of outline in that very answer, we don't have
clarity as to how these savings will actually be achieved, what the
actual game plan is. I guess what I'm really trying to get at
here is, given that you have represented these
ostensible savings in the budget,
what methodology are you actually using in order to
assess these savings are realistically deliverable before fiscally
forecasting them?
Well, what we do, and look, this is not
particular to this case, is we reflect in our
forecast what cabinet determines.
Yeah.
Cabinet has determined a set of baseline reductions,
just as previous governments have
built in baseline reductions, and that's in our
forecasts.
Mm-hmm.
And I think part of, if I step back,
there'll be different views across this
committee about whether people
like the
spending profile. But I think one of the things that we think
is positive is at least agencies have a
funding path to plan to. And
that's reflected in the forecast. So that gives them a good base to plan.
What comes with that, though, is whether it was 255
or a different number, is there's some uncertainty about how they will live
within whatever cap-
The, the government establishes.
But from our perspective,
we reflect what cabinet has decided.
Yeah. I hear that cabinet has made this decision, but you guys obviously are
supposed to run the ruler over that.
And my understanding, based on your own BFU at page 38, you said that
a portion of the required baseline savings, quote, "Have not been reflected in
agency baselines yet, with specific areas of these savings still to be identified."
Yep.
So you have agencies and departments that are saying, "We don't know how we're
going to meet this thing," yet you guys are still reflecting that in terms of
savings. And again, I'm not having a go at anyone.
No, no.
I'm just really trying to understand the assumptions here.
I suppose what I'm saying is-
Because the assumptions again-
... I think you're not wrong to say, look, there's uncertainty
in every agency about how they'll do that.
What I'm saying is there's a range of levels of confidence about that.
But also I'm saying it's not
surprising that if you actually look out and say, "Here's a funding track over
three years," of course, you're not going to have the
answers to what that's all going to look like in your organization in three years'
time. That is going to evolve and iterate both on
decisions that the agency itself will take, but also
what happens in the wider system.
Yeah. This one, though, is quite different to most other change program.
We're not just looking at cutting jobs, we're also looking at some quite heroic
assumptions from the minister with regards to the efficiency and capacity gains
that we could have with AI, which again, you yourself in BFU note are
uncertain at page 15.
Yeah.
So I guess then, how have you actually factored in that very
uncertainty around the modeling of being able to maintain the
capacity of the public sector despite these 8,700
public sector cuts, and obviously the experience that we're seeing overseas right
now with different governments and corporations backing down from
the heroic assumptions that they had made about rolling out AI?
Well, I think the AI one is a separate issue.
I think how we're handling it is what
you're pointing to. What we've said is we've been very explicit about the
risk, right? That there's a decision there, there's a
risk. Future updates will handle this
as progressively we get more information, as governments make
decisions through B27, B28.
That's how that will work, right?
Yeah. I hear you in terms of being able to point to just noting a
paragraph on the risk. But I guess the point that I'm getting at is that we
currently have a Minister of Finance that is pointing to Treasury's forecast
baking in the effect of the cuts that she has announced as
legitimizing her position, which does inherently make this political.
And that's why I'm trying to get to the assumptions that have been made by Treasury
to that effect. Because I don't think that having a paragraph on the
ambiguity of the risk,
gives the kind of counterbalance or the equivalence or the
balance effectively and transparency and accountability necessary to also then
simultaneously say, "These are forecasted cuts.
These are forecasted spending reductions on the other side of the ledger," if you
understand what I'm saying.
Yeah. I think what I would say is,
in any budget,
governments take decisions on both spending and savings,
where over a forecast period, there's quite a lot of uncertainty.
Mm-hmm.
And so I don't necessarily... You're focusing on this
particular area, and I think you're right to say there's a particular
set of risks.
Mm-hmm.
No disagreement.
But that inherently is the nature
of
budgeting. At the end of the day, any government in New Zealand
has the right through Cabinet to make policy decisions that
have fiscal implications.
Mm-hmm.
And it's not our job to, in a sense, second
guess and say, "Well, you'll never do that, Minister, so we won't put that in," or,
"That will never work out." It's we're transparent about what are the
decisions that government does reflect in the forecasts.
Any government then has to justify the merits or otherwise
of that view, and our job is to ensure that that information is
as transparent as possible.
I think that's a good segue to Dr. Deborah.
One final, if I may?
Yeah.
There's been quite a lot of time.
Okay. I was just hoping for one final to close that out, but-
All right. We're just about out of time.
Yeah, we are. And it's actually a follow on the
previous issue around pay equity and back to the climate one, and it's about
when the liabilities get recognized.
So I'm just wondering about the pay equity one.
So the trigger
for recognizing a pay equity claim in the
budget or wherever it's going to, would that be the lodging of a claim?
Is that enough to trigger a liability?
Well, look, remember the-
Or not a liability, a contingent liability.
No, no.
Yeah.
But remember there are
the two streams. So there's the Crown as employer stream.
Yep.
Right?
So,
at any one time, through other agencies, we are aware
of discussions between those-
Sure
... agencies and unions-
But-
... about a pay equity claim. Every time we do a
forecast-
That gets taken in, no worries.
That's right.
Yes.
And it's
important because
that contingency that we disclose, it is still significant.
The second part-
Under significant
... is around the
funded sector.
Yeah.
And that is
a case where
I think the current government has said the way they want
to address this is case by case.
Yeah.
And
they will want to handle that as one of the many
issues that competes for the budget allowance.
So it's not, if you like, ring-fenced.
Sure. But there's
a legal process around pay equity claims, including
the pay equity claims from the funded sector.
Yeah, that's right. But-
So if someone lodges a claim, do you then have to go
through some kind of assessment of the claim before you advise it?
No, it's not,
because essentially, in that case, the Crown is not a party-
To the claim, what
essentially-
Yeah
... what cabinet would have to agree.
Let's take a-
Still hypothetical
... hypothetical. Say ECE teachers, right?
Well, let's say that-
Most ECE teachers are employed by-
The childcare center
... private.
Yeah.
Yeah, most of them private. So government will have to take a view
about, okay, if there is a pay equity claim that's agreed between
unions and ECE-
Yeah
... employers, what is the Crown's view on that?
Is the Crown happy to have the cost
implications of that flow through into the
payments that essentially parents make to ECE centers
or does the Crown take a view, "No, no, we're going to
subsidize that." There's then a choice for the Crown about how much to do that.
That I think is the-
Yeah. I'm just trying to think where it would sit in those risks and things like
that, and it's sort of-
Well, I think-
Yeah
...
in that case, I think it would be
reflected in a general sense in the specific
fiscal risks.
Yep.
Right.
Okay. It's a-
But it wouldn't be qualified, no
You wouldn't quantify it because you couldn't quantify it.
No.
But you might have to reflect it in the...
Yeah.
Yep, okay. Thank you.
It's just at what point it becomes concrete enough to start. Yeah. Yep. Thank you.
Well, you start crystallizing in the process.
Yep. Mm-hmm.
I think that brings us to the conclusions of our hearing
with the Treasury. Thank you so much for your time.
Yeah, thank you.
It's been a big session for you.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thanks everyone.
It's been slightly theory.
And members, we're back at 1:30 with Geo and then
bigger ones.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Didn't he
get removed from the full trolley?
He should probably-
Reprioritized